🌲Business Problem
Numerous studies have shown that the burden of these pollutants is not evenly shared. Americans of Asian, Hispanic, or Black race/ethnicity had population-weighted mean exposures to light pollution in their neighborhoods that were approximately two times that of White Americans. A study of noise pollution exposure and demographics showed that “noise levels were consistently higher in predominantly Asian, Black and Hispanic neighborhoods”. The most recent EPA publication on the health effects of particle pollution concluded that “nonwhite populations, especially Black Americans, faced higher risk from particle pollution”. Most recently, a Harvard study found that “a small increase in long-term exposure to PM2.5 leads to a large increase in the COVID-19 death rate”, thereby highlighting the disproportionate effect on certain communities. 

In 1994, President Bill Clinton signed Executive Order 12898 for mandating all federal agencies to "collect, maintain and analyze information assessing and comparing environmental and human health risks borne by populations identified by race, national origin or income." Twenty-six years later, the same disproportionately burdened communities are now on the frontlines of a global pandemic. 

We are determined to translate the data into action. We want to ensure the equitable prioritization and distribution of a COVID-19 vaccine to the communities that would immediately reduce the number of COVID-related fatalities.
🌲Business Impact
With understanding of the distribution of key pollutants like noise, light, and air particles across the population, we hope to not just identify density clusters but also identify locations that are accessible and affordable to offer sanctuary areas for detoxifying excursions.

In an effort to understand how multiple environmental pollutants impact health outcomes in the United States, we investigate the following: 
1. Is there a correlation/relationship/interaction between environmental pollutants (air, noise, and light) and the case fatality rate of COVID-19? 
2. Can we identify areas that should be prioritized for vaccine distribution to have earliest impact on reducing COVID-19 fatalities?
3. Can we identify sanctuary areas that are the least polluted to provide pollutant detoxing-based travel recommendations?
These identified sanctuary areas could also become areas that will need to be protected at all costs to provide a temporary getaway for those most affected by pollution. 

We are hoping to create an index, like a walkability score, to inform everything from housing decisions to travel recommendations.  With this we believe we can recommend tailored opportunities to counterbalance the effects of chronic exposure to pollutants with an increasing level of specificity.
🌲Data 
* EPA Hazardous Air Pollutants: This dataset contains daily and sub-daily summary measurements of 187 pollutants tracked by the EPA. It contains fields such as site latitude and longitude, as well as county FIPS code that would allow for us to combine datasets. It also includes the number of measurements per day, the pollutant standard for reference, and the air quality index for each pollutant. 
* EPA’s Environmental Justice Screen: With almost 500 fields, this dataset was collected from a map combining geographic and environmental data on public health. Major variables of interest would be the FIPS code, the various indices for toxic pollutants and the risk of cancer, and proximity to risk facilities. 
* Census data on American access to health coverage: This dataset indicates the number of people per census tract who have either a public or private insurance plan and their providers. 
* The Atmospheric Composition Analysis Group at Dalhousie University: This contains county-level PM 2.5 exposure data with fields including FIPS code, year of collection, as well as the PM 2.5 index. 
* Science on a Sphere Light Pollution -Artificial Sky Brightness: This contains GIS-based data showing light pollution generated by artificial lighting as it relates to masking the starry nights of the Milky Way.
* COVID-19 Cases and Mortality Data:
* https://projects.iq.harvard.edu/covid-pm
Dataset	Start Year	End Year	County-Level	Data Format	Size of Dataset	People	Link to Dataset
Air	2010	2018	true			Vivian Richards	
Noise			true			Ny Ony Razafindrabe	
Light			true			Vivian Richards	
COVID-19 cases data			true			Ambria	
COVID-19 fatality data			true			Ny Ony Razafindrabe	
Census Data Race			true			Ambria	
ACS Health Coverage			true			Vivian Richards	

🌲Methods
Visualizations
A key component of understanding patterns between environmental pollution and the population it affects is creating pertinent visualizations. While we won’t be able to conclude on correlation right away, these will provide us with a good starting point to formulate hypotheses. 
Here are some of the visualizations that we plan to provide. This list is subject to change and will evolve with our project. 
* A series of heatmaps highlighting the following: 
  * population distribution across the United States; that is, where are most people located and where are the most at-risk populations located (by age, race and ethnicity, other variables)
  * geographical distribution of pollutants (air, noise, light, bio)
  * geographical distribution of health indices (we are still in the process of determining what these indices will consist of)
With the help of these maps, we will be able to already identify areas where a concentration of variables overlap. Simultaneously, we can also look at the highest variations in exposed populations. For example, we could notice that Texas has 90% of African Americans living in high pollutant areas whereas California has a more equal distribution by race. Furthermore, not only will this guide our final product and recommendations, but can turn our attention towards key clustered areas for more meaningful results. If necessary, they can also redirect the remainder of our analysis. 
Note that these maps can be done at various geographic levels to understand how patterns change depending on the granularity of the data (i.e. county, congressional district, block groups, census blocks, etc.)

* Correlation plot of health index outcomes by pollution levels
* Scatterplot of different pollution indices to speculate how they interact with one another
* Bar graph of select cities or areas as “case studies” to see the breakdown of populations and pollution

We gathered different datasets based on noise, light, and air particle pollution in terms of environmental justice. Our goal is to generate visualization that can show the summary of the main characteristics of the variables. We hope this will assist in guiding our analysis and solving the most useful and interesting problem.

In our EDA, we took the following steps:
Step 1: Check the length of the dataset, the missing and duplicate values, columns for only one unique value. Drop columns appropriately.
Step 2: Convert columns to numeric type, float and integers
Step 3: Check the correlation matrix (heat map) and scatter plot
Step 3: Check data distribution using box plots and histograms
Step 4: Remove as many outliers as possible

We used the following libraries: pandas for manipulation, seaborn and matplotlib for visualization.
Models
We plan to explore different clustering analysis algorithms, particularly k-means clustering to group different communities together based on the indexes related to air quality, noise, and light pollution. Depending on the performance, we might consider other clustering-based methods like Support Vector Machine (SVM) but we will be keeping it simple initially. We will also consider the linearity of our data in making a choice as non k-means do not perform well on linear data.  Most of the libraries we would be adopting in this work are from scikit-learn.  

🌲Interface
DS4A 70.jpg

🌲Milestones
Version 1: Build simple dashboard (2 static plots, 1 interactive map plots) to understand the geographical distribution of air, light, and noise pollution compared to the geographic distribution of COVID-19 cases and fatalities.
Version 2: Build forecast model (+1 static plots, +1 interactive plots) to forecast the impact of COVID-19 spread and “herd immunity” on underrepresented and economic disadvantaged groups of the US population.
Version 3: Build SHAP tree model (+1 interactive plot) to explain the outputs of combinations of noise, light, and air pollution on COVID cases:fatalities.
Version 4: Compare the United States model against the data from the United Kingdom.


Date	Deliverable	Details
11/26/2020	Submit Report with details about dataset	
12/10/2020	Submit report with cleaning methodology	
12/17/2020	Submit report with basic EDA details	
1/14/2021	Submit report with in-depth EDA details + frontend mockup	
1/25/2021	Submit report with frontend design + presentation outline	
2/1/2021	Submit report with all analysis done	
2/8/2021	Presentation draft + Updated Report + Datafolio	
2/13/2021	Final draft of report + Final Presentation	

🌲Concerns 
We are concerned about the ability to separate the confounding variables as we begin to explore the social determinants of COVID-19 fatality outcomes.  We thinking about identifying these determinants, measuring them, and controlling for them in our analysis. 

We are also concerned about ensuring our project has novelty and brings a new perspective to the discussion. 

The possibility for a considerable amounts data noise and covariates is a concern that we cannot yet determine how it will impact our efforts.




